installwindows.md, before:

## Windows Installation

If your a windows user using emoncms can you help complete this guide?

#### 1) Install WAMP

[http://www.wampserver.com/en/](http://www.wampserver.com/en/)

![WAMP](files/wampserver.png)

<br>

#### 2) Configure your server to accept mod rewrite

Emoncms makes use of htaccess mod_rewrite to create clean URL's while using the front controller and MVC architecture.

This may help: [http://blog.cmstutorials.org/tutorials/tips-tricks/how-to-make-mod_rewrite-work-on-wamp](http://blog.cmstutorials.org/tutorials/tips-tricks/how-to-make-mod_rewrite-work-on-wamp)

#### 3) Create a MYSQL database

The easiest way to do this via a GUI is through a program called phpmyadmin. If you have a shared server you may need to do this through another mysql database setup program before you can access the database through phpmyadmin.

#### 4) Download emoncms

    https://github.com/emoncms/emoncms

#### 5) Place emoncms in your WAMP public html directory

#### 6) Set emoncms settings.php

Copy default.settings.php and rename to settings.php. Enter your database username, password, server and database name.

#### 7) Thats it! Open emoncms in your browser
 
**(Optional) Enable Multi lingual support using gettext**

Not sure how to do this in windows but here is how its done in ubuntu linux which may give some clues, step 4 onwards: 

[http:/openenergymonitor.org/emon/emoncms/using-gettext-on-ubuntu](http://openenergymonitor.org/emon/emoncms/using-gettext-on-ubuntu)

<br>

Commit message:

updated windows installation details thanks to Robert Wall

installwindows.md, after:

## Windows Installation

If your a windows user using emoncms can you help complete this guide?

#### 1) Install WAMP

[http://www.wampserver.com/en/](http://www.wampserver.com/en/)

![WAMP](files/wampserver.png)

<br>

#### 2) Configure your server to accept mod rewrite

Emoncms makes use of htaccess mod_rewrite to create clean URL's while using the front controller and MVC architecture.

On Wampserver, enabling mod-rewrite is simply a case of left-click on your Wamp icon and hover on Apache, then hover over Apache Modules, then click PHP, then click on rewrite-module (you'll need to scroll down the list - it it's ticked, it's enabled). Do a restart all services on Wampserver.

#### 3) Create a MYSQL database

The easiest way to do this via a GUI is through a program called phpmyadmin. If you have a shared server you may need to do this through another mysql database setup program before you can access the database through phpmyadmin.

When, in phpmyadmin, the database has been created, a new user must also be created on host "localhost" (not "%") and have a password set.  When the user has been created, he needs to have "all" privileges over the new database that has just been created (scroll down for Database-specific privileges). Those 4 items - the new user name, password, "localhost" and database name are the values that go into the settings.php file. Note: this user isn't necessarily the same as one of the users who are allowed to register in emoncms once it's running.

#### 4) Download emoncms

    https://github.com/emoncms/emoncms

#### 5) Place emoncms in your WAMP public html directory

#### 6) Set emoncms settings.php

Copy default.settings.php and rename to settings.php. Enter your database username, password, server and database name.

#### 7) Thats it! Open emoncms in your browser
 
**(Optional) Enable Multi lingual support using gettext**

The  "gettext" extension for Apache needs to be installed. Left-click on your Wamp icon and hover on PHP, then click on php.ini.  This will open the file in Notepad and you'll see the line about half-way way down (find "gettext"):
;extension=php_gettext.dll

it's commented out - remove the semi-colon and save the file. Do a restart all services on Wampserver.
